<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h3>
			<section id="chapter-14-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>Mamma was crying.</p>
				<p>Papa had left the dining-room. Mary sat at the foot of the table, and her mother at the head. The space between was covered and piled with Mark’s kit: the socks, the pocket-handkerchiefs, the vests, the fine white pyjamas. The hanging white globes of the gaselier shone on them. All day Mary had been writing “<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.E.</abbr> Olivier, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.E.</abbr> Olivier,” in clear, hard letters, like print. The iridescent ink was grey on the white linen and lawn, black when you stamped with the hot iron: <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.E.</abbr> Olivier. Mamma was embroidering <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.E.O.</abbr> in crimson silk on a black sock.</p>
				<p>Mark was in the Army now; in the Royal Field Artillery. He was going to India. In two weeks, before the middle of April, he would be gone. They had known this so long that now and then they could forget it; they could be glad that Mark should have all those things, so many more, and more beautiful, than he had ever had. They were appeased with their labour of forming, over and over again, the letters, clear and perfect, of his name.</p>
				<p>Then Papa had come in and said that Dan was not going to live at home any more. He had taken rooms in Bloomsbury with young Vickers.</p>
				<p>Dan had not gone to Cambridge when he left Chelmsted, as Mamma had intended. There hadn’t been enough money.</p>
				<p>Uncle Victor had paid for Mark’s last year at Woolwich and for his outfit now. Some day Mamma would pay him back again.</p>
				<p>Dan had gone first into Papa’s office; then into Uncle Edward’s office. He was in Uncle Victor’s office now. Sometimes he didn’t get home till after midnight. Sometimes when you went into his room to call him in the morning he wasn’t there; but there were the bedclothes turned down as Catty had left them, with his nightshirt folded on the top.</p>
				<p>Her mother said: “I hope you’re content now you’ve finished your work.”</p>
				<p>“<em>My</em> work?” her father said.</p>
				<p>“Yes, yours. You couldn’t rest till you’d got the poor boy out of your office, and now you’ve turned him out of the house. I suppose you thought that with Mark going you’d better make a clean sweep. It’ll be Roddy next.”</p>
				<p>“I didn’t turn him out of the house. But it was about time he went. The young cub’s temper is getting unbearable.”</p>
				<p>“I daresay. You ruined Dan’s temper with your silly tease⁠—tease⁠—tease⁠—from morning till night. You can’t see a dog without wanting to make it snap and snarl. It was the same with all the children. And when they turned you bullied them. Just because you couldn’t break Mark’s spirit you tried to crush Dan’s. It’s a wonder he has any temper left.”</p>
				<p>Emilius stroked his beard.</p>
				<p>“That’s right. Stroke your beard as if nothing mattered but your pleasure. You’ll be happy enough when Mark’s gone.”</p>
				<p>Emilius left off stroking his beard.</p>
				<p>“You say I turned him out of the office,” he said. “Did he stay with Edward?”</p>
				<p>“Nobody could stay with Edward. You couldn’t yourself.”</p>
				<p>“Ask Victor how long he thinks he’ll keep him.”</p>
				<p>“What do you mean, Emilius?”</p>
				<p>He didn’t answer. He stood there, his lips pouting between his moustache and beard, his eyes smiling wickedly, as if he had just found out he could torment her more by not saying what he meant.</p>
				<p>“If Dan went to the bad,” she said, “I wouldn’t blame him. It would serve you right.</p>
				<p>“Unless,” she added, “that’s what you want.”</p>
				<p>And she began to cry.</p>
				<p>She cried as a child cries, with spasms of sobbing, her pretty mouth spoiled, stretched wide, working, like india-rubber; dull red blotches creeping up to the brown stains about her eyes. Her tears splashed on to the fine, black silk web of the sock and sparkled there.</p>
				<p>Emilius had gone from the room, leaving the door open. Mary got up and shut it. She stood, hesitating. The helpless sobbing drew her, frightened her, stirred her to exasperation that was helpless too. Her mother had never been more intolerably dear.</p>
				<p>She went to her. She put her arm round her.</p>
				<p>“Don’t, Mamma darling. Why do you let him torture you? He didn’t turn Dan out of the office. He let him go because he can’t afford to pay him enough.”</p>
				<p>“I know that as well as you,” her mother said surprisingly.</p>
				<p>She drew herself from the protecting arm.</p>
				<p>“Well, then⁠—But, oh, what a brute he is. <em>What</em> a brute!”</p>
				<p>“For shame to talk that way of your father. <em>You’ve</em> no right. You’re the one that always goes scot-free.”</p>
				<p>And, beginning to cry again, she rose and went out, grasping Mark’s sock in her convulsive hand.</p>
				<p>“Mary, did you hear your mother say I bullied you?”</p>
				<p>Her father had come back into the room.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” she said.</p>
				<p>“Have I ever bullied you?”</p>
				<p>She looked at him steadily.</p>
				<p>“No. You would have done if Mamma had loved me as much as she loves Mark. I wish you had. I wish you’d bullied the life out of me. I shouldn’t have cared. I wish you’d hated me. Then I should have known she loved me.”</p>
				<p>He looked at her in silence, with round, startled eyes. He understood.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>“<span xml:lang="la">Ubique</span>⁠—”</p>
				<p>The gunner’s motto. Mark’s motto, stamped on all the letters he would write. A blue gun on a blue gun-carriage, the muzzle pointing to the left. The motto waving underneath:</p>
				<p>“<b xml:lang="la">Ubique</b>.”</p>
				<p>At soldiers’ funerals the coffin was carried on a gun-carriage and covered with a flag.</p>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Ubique quo fas et gloria ducunt.</i>” All through the excitement of the evening it went on sounding in her head.</p>
				<p>It was Mark’s coming of age party in the week before he went. The first time she could remember being important at a party. Her consciousness of being important was intense, exquisite. She was Sublieutenant Mark Olivier’s sister. His only one.</p>
				<p>And, besides, she looked nice.</p>
				<p>Last year’s white muslin, ironed out, looked as good as new. The blue sash really was new; and Mamma had lent her one of her necklets, a turquoise heart on a thin gold chain. In the looking-glass she could see her eyes shining under her square brown fringe: spots of gold darting through brown crystal. Her brown hair shone red on the top and gold underneath. The side pieces, rolled above her ears and plaited behind, made a fillet for her back hair. Her back hair was too short. She tried to make it reach to her waist by pulling the curled tips straight; but they only sprang back to her shoulder-blades again. It was unfortunate.</p>
				<p>Catty, securing the wonderful fillet with a blue ribbon told her not to be unhappy. She would “do.”</p>
				<p>Mamma was beautiful in her lavender-grey silk and her black jet cross with the diamond star. They all had to stand together, a little behind her, near the door, and shake hands with the people as they came in. Mary was surprised that they should shake hands with her before they shook hands with Mark; it didn’t seem right, somehow, when it was his birthday.</p>
				<p>Everybody had come except Aunt Charlotte; even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marriott, though he was supposed to be afraid of parties. (You couldn’t ask Aunt Charlotte because of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marriott.) There were the two Manistys, looking taller and leaner than ever. And there was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper with Dora and Effie. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper, black hawk’s eyes in purple rings; white powder over crushed carmines; a black wing of hair folded over grey down. Effie’s pretty, piercing face; small head poised to strike. Dora, a young likeness of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper, an old likeness of Effie, pretty when Effie wasn’t there.</p>
				<p>When they looked at you you saw that your muslin was not as good as new. When they looked at Mamma you saw that her lavender silk was old-fashioned and that nobody wore black jet crosses now. You were frilly and floppy when everybody else was tight and straight in Princess dresses.</p>
				<p>Mamma was more beautiful than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper; and her hair, anyhow, was in the fashion, parted at the side, a soft brown wing folded over her left ear.</p>
				<p>But that made her look small and pathetic⁠—a wounded bird. She ought not to have been made to look like that.</p>
				<p>You could hear Dora and Effie being kind to Mamma. “Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Olivier”⁠—Indulgence⁠—Condescension. As if to an unfortunate and rather foolish person. Mark could see that. He was smiling: a hard, angry smile.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper was Mamma’s dearest friend. They could sit and talk to each other about nothing for hours together. In the holidays <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper used to be always coming over to talk to Mamma, always bringing Dora and Effie with her, always asking Mark and Dan and Roddy to her house, always wondering why Mark never went.</p>
				<p>Dan went. Dan seemed as if he couldn’t keep away.</p>
				<p>This year <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper had left off asking Mark and Dan and Roddy. She had left off bringing Dora and Effie with her.</p>
				<p>Mary wondered why she had brought them now, and why her mother had asked them.</p>
				<p>The Manistys. She had brought them for the Manistys. She wanted Mamma to see what she had brought them for. And Mamma had asked them because she didn’t care, and wanted them to see that she didn’t care, and that Mark didn’t care either.</p>
				<p>If they only knew how Mark detested them with their “<em>Dear</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Olivier”!</p>
				<p>Something was going on. She heard Uncle Victor saying to Aunt Lavvy, “Mark’s party is a bit rough on Dan.”</p>
				<p>Dan was trying to get to Effie through a gap in the group formed by the Manistys and two young subalterns, Mark’s friends. Each time he did it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper stopped him by moving somehow so as to fill the gap. He gave it up at last, to sit by himself at the bottom of the room, jammed into a corner between the chimneypiece and the rosewood cabinet, where he stared at Effie with hot, unhappy eyes.</p>
				<p>Supper. Mamma was worried about the supper. She would have liked to have given them a nicer one, but there wasn’t enough money; besides, she was afraid of what Uncle Victor would think if they were extravagant. That was the worst of borrowing, Mark said; you couldn’t spend so much afterwards. Still, there was enough wine yet in the cellar for fifty parties. You could see, now, some advantage in Papa’s habit of never drinking any but the best wine and laying in a large stock of it while he could.</p>
				<p>Mary noticed that Papa and Dan drank the most. Perhaps Dan drank more than Papa. The smell of wine was over all the supper, spoiling it, sending through her nerves a reminiscent shiver of disgust.</p>
				<p>Mark brought her back into the dining-room for the ice she hadn’t had. Dan was there, by himself, sitting in the place Effie had just left. Effie’s glass had still some wine in it. You could see him look for the wet side of the rim and suck the drops that had touched her mouth. Something small and white was on the floor beside him. Effie’s pocket-handkerchief. He stooped for it. You could hear him breathing up the scent on it with big, sighing sobs.</p>
				<p>They slunk back into the drawing-room.</p>
				<p>Mark asked her to play something.</p>
				<p>“Make a noise, Minky. Perhaps they’ll go.”</p>
				<p>“The Hungarian March.” She could play it better than Mamma. Mamma never could see that the bass might be even more important than the treble. She was glad that she could play it better than Mamma, and she hated herself for being glad.</p>
				<p>Mark stood by the piano and looked at her as she played. They talked under cover of the “Droom⁠—Droom⁠—Droom-era-room.”</p>
				<p>“Mark, am I looking too awful?”</p>
				<p>“No. Pretty Minx. Very pretty Minx.”</p>
				<p>“We mustn’t, Mark. They’ll hear us. They’ll think us idiots.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t care if they do. Don’t you wish they’d go? Clever Minx. Clever paws.”</p>
				<p>Mamma passed and looked at them. Her face shrank and sharpened under the dropped wing of her hair. She must have heard what Mark said. She hated it when Mark talked and looked like that. She hated it when you played <em>her</em> music.</p>
				<p>Beethoven, then. The “Sonata Eroica” was bound up with “Violetta,” the “Guards” and “Mabel” Waltzes and the “Pluie des Perles.”</p>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Ubique quo fas et gloria ducunt.</i>” That was the meaning of the noble, serious, passionate music.</p>
				<p>Roddy called out, “Oh, <em>not that</em> dull old thing.”</p>
				<p>No. Not that. There was the Funeral March in it: <i xml:lang="la">sulle morte d’un eroe</i>. Mark was going away.</p>
				<p>“Waldteufel,” then. <em>One</em>⁠—two⁠—three. <em>One</em>⁠—two⁠—three. Sustained thrum in the bass. One⁠—two⁠—three. Thursday⁠—Friday⁠—<em>One</em>⁠—two⁠—three. Saturday⁠—Sunday. Beat of her thoughts, beat of the music in a sort of syncopated time. <em>One</em>⁠—two⁠—three, Monday.</p>
				<p>On Tuesday Mark would be gone.</p>
				<p>His eyes made her break off to look round. Dan had come back into the room, to his place between the cabinet and the chimneypiece. He stooped forward, his head hanging as if some weight dragged it. His eyes, turned up, staring at Effie, showed half circles of bloodshot white. His face was flushed. A queer, leaden grey flush.</p>
				<p>Aunt Lavvy sat beside him. She had her hand on his arm, to keep him quiet there in his corner.</p>
				<p>“Mark⁠—what’s the matter with Dan?”</p>
				<p><em>One</em>⁠—two⁠—three. <em>One</em>⁠—two⁠—three. Something bumped against the glass door of the cabinet. A light tinkling crash of a broken pane. She could see slantwise as she went on playing. Dan was standing up. He swayed, feeling for the ledge of the cabinet. Then he started to come down the room, his head lowered, thrust forward, his eyes heavy with some earnest, sombre purpose.</p>
				<p>He seemed to be hours coming down the room by himself. Hours standing in the middle of the room, holding on to the parrot chair.</p>
				<p>“Mark!”</p>
				<p>“Go on playing.”</p>
				<p>He went to him. Roddy sprang up from somewhere. Hours while they were getting Dan away from the parrot chair to the door beside the piano. Hours between the opening and sudden slamming of the door.</p>
				<p>But she had not played a dozen bars. She went on playing.</p>
				<p>“Wait a minute, Effie.”</p>
				<p>Effie was standing beside her with her hand on the door.</p>
				<p>“I’ve lost my pocket-handkerchief. I must have left it in the dining-room. I <em>know</em> I left it in the dining-room,” she said, fussing.</p>
				<p>Mary got up. “All right. I’ll fetch it.”</p>
				<p>She opened the door and shut it again quickly.</p>
				<p>“I can’t go⁠—yet.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>Friday, Saturday and Sunday passed, each with a separate, hurrying pace that quickened towards bedtime.</p>
				<p>Mark’s last night. She had left her door open so that she could hear him come upstairs. He came and sat on her bed as he used to do years ago when she was afraid of the ghost in the passage.</p>
				<p>“I shan’t be away forever, Minky. Only five years.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, but you’ll be twenty-six then, and I shall be nineteen. We shan’t be ourselves.”</p>
				<p>“I shall be my self. Five years isn’t really long.”</p>
				<p>“You⁠—you’ll like it, Mark. There’ll be jungles with bisons and tigers.”</p>
				<p>“Yes. Jungles.”</p>
				<p>“And polo.”</p>
				<p>“Shan’t be able to go in for polo.”</p>
				<p>“Why not?”</p>
				<p>“Ponies. Too expensive.”</p>
				<p>They sat silent.</p>
				<p>“What I <em>don’t</em> like,” Mark said in a sleepy voice, “is leaving Papa.”</p>
				<p>“Papa?”</p>
				<p>He really meant it. “Wish I’d been decenter to him,” he said.</p>
				<p>And then: “Minky⁠—you’ll be kind to little Mamma.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, Mark⁠—aren’t I?”</p>
				<p>“Not always. Not when you say funny things about the Bible.”</p>
				<p>“You say funny things yourself.”</p>
				<p>“Yes; but she thinks I don’t mean them, so it doesn’t matter.”</p>
				<p>“She thinks I don’t mean them, either.”</p>
				<p>“Well⁠—let her go on thinking it. Do what she wants⁠—even when it’s beastly.”</p>
				<p>“It’s all very well for you. She doesn’t want <em>you</em> to learn the Thirty-Nine Articles. What would you do if she did?”</p>
				<p>“Learn them, of course. Lie about them, if that would please her.”</p>
				<p>She thought: “Mamma didn’t want him to be a soldier.”</p>
				<p>As if he knew what she was thinking, he said, “She doesn’t really mind my going into the Army. I knew she wouldn’t. Besides, I had to.”</p>
				<p>“Yes.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll make it up to her,” he said. “I won’t do any other thing she wouldn’t like. I won’t marry. I won’t play polo. I’ll live on my pay and give poor Victor back his money. And there’s one good thing about it. Papa’ll be happier when I’m not here.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>“Mark!”</p>
				<p>“Minky!”</p>
				<p>“He had said good night and gone to his room and come back again to hold her still tighter in his arms.</p>
				<p>“What?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing,” he said. “Only⁠—good night.”</p>
				<p>Tomorrow no lingering and no words. Mark’s feet quick in the passage. A door shut to, a short, crushing embrace before he turned from her to her mother.</p>
				<p>Her mother and she alone together in the emptied room, turning from each other, without a word.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>The wallflowers had grown up under the south side of the garden wall; a hedge of butterfly-brown and saffron. They gave out a hot, velvet smell, like roses and violets laced with mignonette.</p>
				<p>Mamma stood looking at the wallflowers, smiling at them, happy, as if Mark had never gone.</p>
				<p>As if Mark had never gone.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
