<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
			</h3>
			<section id="chapter-24-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>Everybody in the village knew you had been jilted. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Waugh and Miss Frewin knew it, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horn, the grocer, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Oldshaw at the bank. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belk, the Justice of the Peace⁠—little pink and flaxen gentleman, carrying himself with an air of pompous levity⁠—eyes slewing round as you passed; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk⁠—hard, tight rotundity, little iron-grey eyes twinkling busily in a snub face, putty-skinned with a bilious gleam; curious eyes, busy eyes saying, “I’d like to know what she did to be jilted.”</p>
				<p>Minna and Sophy Acroyd, with their blown faces and small, disgusted mouths: you could see them look at each other; they were saying, “Here’s that awful girl again.” They were glad you were jilted.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spencer Rollitt looked at you with his hard, blue eyes. His mouth closed tight with a snap when he saw you coming. He had disapproved of you ever since you played hide-and-seek in his garden with his nephew. He thought it served you right to be jilted.</p>
				<p>And there was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles’s kind look under his savage, shaggy eyebrows, and Miss Kendal’s squeeze of your hand when you left her, and the sudden start in Dorsy Heron’s black hare’s eyes. They were sorry for you because you had been jilted.</p>
				<p>Miss Louisa Wright was sorry for you. She would ask you to tea in her little green-dark drawing-room; she lived in the ivy house next door to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Waugh; the piano would be open, the yellow keys shining; from the white title page enormous black letters would call to you across the room: “Cleansing Fires.” That was the song she sang when she was thinking about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles. First you played for her the Moonlight Sonata, and then she sang for you with a feverish exaltation:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“For as gold is refined in the <em>fi</em>-yer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So a heart is tried by pain.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>She sang it to comfort you.</p>
				<p>Her head quivered slightly as she shook the notes out of her throat in ecstasy.</p>
				<p>She was sorry for you; but she was like Aunt Lavvy; she thought it was a good thing to be jilted; for then you were purified; your soul was set free; it went up, writhing and aspiring, in a white flame to God.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>“Mary, why are you always admiring yourself in the glass?”</p>
				<p>“I’m not admiring myself. I only wanted to see if I was better-looking than last time.”</p>
				<p>“Why are you worrying about it? You never used to.”</p>
				<p>“Because I used to think I was pretty.”</p>
				<p>Her mother smiled. “You were pretty.” And took back her smile. “You’d be pretty always if you were happy, and you’d be happy if you were good. There’s no happiness for any of us without Christ.”</p>
				<p>She ignored the dexterous application.</p>
				<p>“Do you mean I’m not, then, really, so very ugly?”</p>
				<p>“Nobody said you were ugly.”</p>
				<p>“Maurice Jourdain did.”</p>
				<p>“You don’t mean to say you’re still thinking of that man?”</p>
				<p>“Not thinking exactly. Only wondering. Wondering what it was he hated so.”</p>
				<p>“You wouldn’t wonder if you knew the sort of man he is. A man who could threaten you with his infidelity.”</p>
				<p>“He never threatened me.”</p>
				<p>“I suppose it was me he threatened, then.”</p>
				<p>“What did he say?”</p>
				<p>“He said that if his wife didn’t take care to please him there were other women who would.”</p>
				<p>“He ought to have said that to me. It was horrible of him to say it to you.”</p>
				<p>She didn’t know why she felt that it was horrible.</p>
				<p>“I can tell you <em>one</em> thing,” said her mother, as if she had not told her anything. “It was those books you read. That everlasting philosophy. He said it was answerable for the whole thing.”</p>
				<p>“Then it was the⁠—<em>the whole thing</em> he hated.”</p>
				<p>“I suppose so,” her mother said, dismissing a matter of small interest. “You’d better change that skirt if you’re going with me to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Waugh’s.”</p>
				<p>“Do you mind if I go for a walk instead?”</p>
				<p>“Not if it makes you any more contented.”</p>
				<p>“It might. Are you sure you don’t mind?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, go along with you!”</p>
				<p>Her mother was pleased. She was always pleased when she scored a point against philosophy.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk were coming along High Row. She avoided them by turning down the narrow passage into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horn’s yard and the Back Lane. From the Back Lane you could get up through the fields to the schoolhouse lane without seeing people.</p>
				<p>She hated seeing them. They all thought the same thing: that you wanted Maurice Jourdain and that you were unhappy because you hadn’t got him. They thought it was awful of you. Mamma thought it was awful, like⁠—like Aunt Charlotte wanting to marry the piano-tuner, or poor Jenny wanting to marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall.</p>
				<p>Maurice Jourdain knew better than that. He knew you didn’t want to marry him any more than he wanted to marry you. He nagged at you about your hair, about philosophy⁠—she could hear his voice nag-nagging now as she went up the lane⁠—he could nag worse than a woman, but he knew. <em>She</em> knew. As far as she could see through the working of his dark mind, first he had cared for her, cared violently. Then he had not cared.</p>
				<p>That would be because he cared for some other woman. There were two of them. The girl and the married woman. She felt no jealousy and no interest in them beyond wondering which of them it would be and what they would be like. There had been two Mary Oliviers; long-haired⁠—short-haired, and she had been jealous of the long-haired one. Jealous of herself.</p>
				<p>There had been two Maurice Jourdains, the one who said, “I’ll understand. I’ll never lose my temper”; the one with the crystal mind, shining and flashing, the mind like a big room filled from end to end with light. But he had never existed.</p>
				<p>Maurice Jourdain was only a name. A name for intellectual beauty. You could love that. Love was “the cle‑eansing <em>fi</em>-yer!” There was the love of the body and the love of the soul. Perhaps she had loved Maurice Jourdain with her soul and not with her body. No. She had <em>not</em> loved him with her soul, either. Body and soul; soul and body. Spinoza said they were two aspects of the same thing. <em>What</em> thing? Perhaps it was silly to ask what thing; it would be just body <em>and</em> soul. Somebody talked about a soul dragging a corpse. Her body wasn’t a corpse; it was strong and active; it could play games and jump; it could pick Dan up and carry him round the table; it could run a mile straight on end. It could excite itself with its own activity and strength. It dragged a corpse-like soul, dull and heavy; a soul that would never be excited again, never lift itself up again in any ecstasy.</p>
				<p>If only he had let her alone. If only she could go back to her real life. But she couldn’t. She couldn’t feel any more her sudden, secret happiness. Maurice Jourdain had driven it away. It had nothing to do with Maurice Jourdain. He ought not to have been able to take it from you.</p>
				<p>She might go up to Karva Hill to look for it; but it would not be there. She couldn’t even remember what it had been like.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>New Year’s night. She was lying awake in her white cell.</p>
				<p>She hated Maurice Jourdain. His wearily searching eyes made her restless. His man’s voice made her restless with its questions. “Do you know what it will be like⁠—afterwards?” “Do you really want me?”</p>
				<p>She didn’t want him. But she wanted Somebody. Somebody. Somebody. He had left her with this ungovernable want.</p>
				<p>Somebody. If you lay very still and shut your eyes he would come to you. You would see him. You knew what he was like. He had Jimmy’s body and Jimmy’s face, and Mark’s ways. He had the soul of Shelley and the mind of Spinoza and Immanuel Kant.</p>
				<p>They talked to each other. Her reverie ran first into long, fascinating conversations about Space and Time and the Thing-in-itself, and the Transcendental Ego. He could tell you whether you were right or wrong; whether Substance and the Thing-in-itself were the same thing or different.</p>
				<p>“Die⁠—If thou wouldst be with that which thou dost seek.” He wrote that. He wrote all Shelley’s poems except the bad ones. He wrote Swinburne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Atalanta in Calydon</i>. He could understand your wanting to know what the Thing-in-itself was. If by dying tomorrow, tonight, this minute, you could know what it was, you would be glad to die. Wouldn’t you?</p>
				<p>The world was built up in Space and Time. Time and Space were forms of thought⁠—ways of thinking. If there was thinking there would be a thinker. Supposing⁠—supposing the Transcendental Ego was the Thing-in-itself?</p>
				<p>That was <em>his</em> idea. She was content to let him have the best ones. You could keep him going for quite a long time that way before you got tired.</p>
				<p>The nicest way of all, though, was not to be yourself, but to be him; to live his exciting, adventurous, dangerous life. Then you could raise an army and free Ireland from the English, and Armenia from the Turks. You could go away to beautiful golden cities, melting in sunshine. You could sail in the China Sea; you could get into Central Africa among savage people with queer, bloody gods. You could find out all sorts of things.</p>
				<p>You were he, and at the same time you were yourself, going about with him. You loved him with a passionate, self-immolating love. There wasn’t room for both of you on the raft, you sat cramped up, huddled together. Not enough hard tack. While he was sleeping you slipped off. A shark got you. It had a face like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles. The lunatic was running after him like mad, with a revolver. You ran like mad. Morfe Bridge. When he raised his arm you jerked it up and the revolver went off into the air. The fire was between his bed and the door. It curled and broke along the floor like surf. You waded through it. You picked him up and carried him out as Sister Dora carried the corpses with the smallpox. A screw loose somewhere. A tap turned on. Your mind dribbled imbecilities.</p>
				<p>She kicked. “I won’t think. I won’t think about it any more!”</p>
				<p>Restlessness. It ached. It gnawed, stopping a minute, beginning again, only to be appeased by reverie, by the running tap.</p>
				<p>Restlessness. That was desire. It must be.</p>
				<p>Desire: <span xml:lang="grc">ἱμερος. Ἔρως.</span> There was the chorus in the Antigone:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="grc">
					<p>
						<span>“Ἔρως ἀνίκατε μάχαν,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ἔρως ὁς ἐν κτήμασι πίπτεις.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>There was Swinburne:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“… swift and subtle and blind as a flame of fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before thee the laughter, behind thee the tears of desire.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>There was the song Minna Acroyd sang at the Sutcliffes’ party. “Sighing and sad for desire of the bee.” How could anybody sing such a silly song?</p>
				<p>Through the wide open window she could smell the frost; she could hear it tingle. She put up her mouth above the bedclothes and drank down the clear, cold air. She thought with pleasure of the ice in her bath in the morning. It would break under her feet, splintering and tinkling like glass. If you kept on thinking about it you would sleep.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>Passion Week.</p>
				<p>Her mother was reading the Lessons for the Day. Mary waited till she had finished.</p>
				<p>“Mamma⁠—what was the matter with Aunt Charlotte?”</p>
				<p>“I’m sure I don’t know. Except that she was always thinking about getting married. Whatever put Aunt Charlotte in your head?”</p>
				<p>Her mother looked up from the Prayer Book as she closed it. Sweet and pretty; sweet and pretty; young almost, as she used to look, and tranquil.</p>
				<p>“It’s my belief,” she said, “there wouldn’t have been anything the matter with her if your Grandmamma Olivier hadn’t spoiled her. Charlotte was as vain as a little peacock, and your Grandmamma was always petting and praising her and letting her have her own way.”</p>
				<p>“If she’d had her own way she’d have been married, and then perhaps she wouldn’t have gone mad.”</p>
				<p>“She might have gone madder,” said her mother. “It was a good thing for you, my dear, you didn’t get your way. I’d rather have seen you in your coffin than married to Maurice Jourdain.”</p>
				<p>“Whoever it had been, you’d have said that.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps I should. I don’t want my only daughter to go away and leave me. It would be different if there were six or seven of you.”</p>
				<p>Her mother’s complacence and tranquillity annoyed her. She hated her mother. She adored her and hated her. Mamma had married for her own pleasure, for her passion. She had brought you into the world, without asking your leave, for her own pleasure. She had brought you into the world to be unhappy. She had planned for you to do the things that she did. She cared for you only as long as you were doing them. When you left off and did other things she left off caring.</p>
				<p>“I shall never go away and leave you,” she said.</p>
				<p>She hated her mother and she adored her.</p>
				<p>An hour later, when she found her in the garden kneeling by the violet bed, weeding it, she knelt down beside her, and weeded too.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>April, May, June.</p>
				<p>One afternoon before post-time her mother called her into the study to show her <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper’s letter.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper wrote about Dora’s engagement and Effie’s wedding. Dora was engaged to Hubert Manisty who would have Vinings. Effie had broken off her engagement to young Tom Manisty; she was married last week to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuart-Gore, the banker. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper thought Effie had been very wise to give up young Manisty for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuart-Gore. She wrote in a postscript: “Maurice Jourdain has just called to ask if I have any news of Mary. I think he would like to know that that wretched affair has not made her unhappy.”</p>
				<p>Mamma was smiling in a nervous way. “What am I to say to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper?”</p>
				<p>“Tell her that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jourdain was right and that I am not at all unhappy.”</p>
				<p>She was glad to take the letter to the post and set his mind at rest.</p>
				<p>It was in June last year that Maurice Jourdain had come to her: June the twenty-fourth. Today was the twenty-fifth. He must have remembered.</p>
				<p>The hayfields shone, ready for mowing. Under the wind the shimmering hay grass moved like waves of hot air, up and up the hill.</p>
				<p>She slipped through the gap by Morfe Bridge and went up the fields to the road on Greffington Edge. She lay down among the bracken in the place where Roddy and she had sat two years ago when they had met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe coming down the road.</p>
				<p>The bracken hid her. It made a green sunshade above her head. She shut her eyes.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="de">
					<p>
						<span>“Kikeriküh! sie glaubten</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Es wäre Hahnen geschrei.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>That was all nonsense. Maurice Jourdain would never have crept in the little henhouse and hidden himself under the straw. He would never have crowed like a cock. Mark and Roddy would. And Harry Craven and Jimmy. Jimmy would certainly have hidden himself under the straw.</p>
				<p>Supposing Jimmy had had a crystal mind. Shining and flashing. Supposing he had never done that awful thing they said he did. Supposing he had had Mark’s ways, had been noble and honourable like Mark⁠—</p>
				<p>The interminable reverie began. He was there beside her in the bracken. She didn’t know what his name would be. It couldn’t be Jimmy or Harry or any of those names. Not Mark. Mark’s name was sacred.</p>
				<p>Cecil, perhaps.</p>
				<p><em>Why</em> Cecil? <em>Cecil?</em>⁠—You ape! You drivelling, dribbling idiot! That was the sort of thing Aunt Charlotte would have thought of.</p>
				<p>She got up with a jump and stretched herself. She would have to run if she was to be home in time for tea.</p>
				<p>From the top hayfield she could see the Sutcliffes’ tennis court; an emerald green space set in thick grey walls. She drew her left hand slowly down her right forearm. The muscle was hardening and thickening.</p>
				<p>Mamma didn’t like it when you went by yourself to play singles with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe. But if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe asked you you would simply have to go. You would have to play a great many singles against <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe if you were to be in good form next year when Mark came home.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>She was always going to the Sutcliffes’ now. Her mother shook her head when she saw her in her short white skirt and white jersey, slashing at nothing with her racquet, ready. Mamma didn’t like the Sutcliffes. She said they hadn’t been nice to poor Papa. They had never asked him again. You could see she thought you a beast to like them.</p>
				<p>“But, Mamma darling, I can’t help liking them.”</p>
				<p>And Mamma would look disgusted and go back to her pansy bed and dig her trowel in with little savage thrusts, and say she supposed you would always have your own way.</p>
				<p>You would go down to Greffington Hall and find <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe sitting under the beech tree on the lawn, in white flannels, looking rather tired and bored. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sutcliffe, a long-faced, delicate-nosed Beauty of Victorian Albums, growing stout, wearing full skirts and white cashmere shawls and wide mushroomy hats when nobody else did. She had an air of doing it on purpose, to be different, like royalty. She would take your hand and press it gently and smile her downward, dragging smile, and she would say, “How is your mother? Does she mind the hot weather? She must come and see me when it’s cooler.” That was the nice way she had, so that you mightn’t think it was Mamma’s fault, or Papa’s, if they didn’t see each other often. And she would look down at her shawl and gather it about her, as if in spirit she had got up and gone away.</p>
				<p>And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe would be standing in front of you, looking suddenly years younger, with his eyes shining and clean as though he had just washed them.</p>
				<p>And after tea you would play singles furiously. For two hours you would try to beat him. When you jumped the net <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sutcliffe would wave her hand and nod to you and smile. You had done something that pleased her.</p>
				<p>Today, when it was all over, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe took her back into the house, and there on the hall table were the books he had got for her from the London Library: The Heine, the Goethe’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Faust</i>, the Sappho, the Darwin’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Origin of Species</i>, the Schopenhauer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung</i>.</p>
				<p>“Five? All at once?”</p>
				<p>“I get fifteen. As long as we’re here you shall have your five.”</p>
				<p>He walked home with her, carrying the books. Five. Five. And when you had finished them there would be five more. It was unbelievable.</p>
				<p>“Why are you so nice to me? Why? <em>Why?</em>”</p>
				<p>“I think it must be because I like you, Mary.”</p>
				<p>Utterly unbelievable.</p>
				<p>“Do⁠—you⁠—<em>really</em>⁠—like me?”</p>
				<p>“I liked you the first day I saw you. With your brother. On Greffington Edge.”</p>
				<p>“I wonder why.” She wondered what he was thinking, what, deep down inside him, he was really thinking.</p>
				<p>“Perhaps it was because you wanted something I could give you.⁠ ⁠… Tennis.⁠ ⁠… You wanted it so badly. Everything you want you want so badly.”</p>
				<p>“And I never knew we were going to be such friends.”</p>
				<p>“No more did I. And I don’t know now how long it’s going to last.”</p>
				<p>“Why shouldn’t it last?”</p>
				<p>“Because next year ‘Mark’ will have come home and you’ll have nothing to say to me.”</p>
				<p>“Mark won’t make a scrap of difference.”</p>
				<p>“Well⁠—if it isn’t ‘Mark’⁠ ⁠… You’ll grow up, Mary, and it won’t amuse you to talk to me any more. I shan’t know you. You’ll wear long skirts and long hair done in the fashion.”</p>
				<p>“I shall always want to talk to you. I shall never do up my hair. I cut it off because I couldn’t be bothered with it. But I was sold. I thought it would curl all over my head, and it didn’t curl.”</p>
				<p>“It curls at the tips,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe said. “I like it. Makes you look like a jolly boy, instead of a dreadful, unapproachable young lady. A little San Giovanni. A little San Giovanni.”</p>
				<p>That was his trick: caressing his own words as if he liked them.</p>
				<p>She wondered what, deep down inside him, he was really like.</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe⁠—if you’d known a girl when she was only fourteen, and you liked her and you never saw her again till she was seventeen, and then you found that she’d gone and cut her hair all off, would it give you an awful shock?”</p>
				<p>“Depends on how much I liked her.”</p>
				<p>“If you’d liked her awfully⁠—would it make you leave off liking her?”</p>
				<p>“I think my friendship could stand the strain.”</p>
				<p>“If it wasn’t just friendship? Supposing it was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sutcliffe?”</p>
				<p>“I shouldn’t like my wife to cut her hair off. It wouldn’t be at all becoming to her.”</p>
				<p>“No. But when she was young?”</p>
				<p>“Ah⁠—when she was young⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Would it have made any difference?”</p>
				<p>“No. No. It wouldn’t have made any difference at all.”</p>
				<p>“You’d have married her just the same?”</p>
				<p>“Just the same, Mary. Why?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, nothing. I thought you’d be like that. I just wanted to make sure.”</p>
				<p>He smiled to himself. He had funny, secret thoughts that you would never know.</p>
				<p>“Well,” she said, “I didn’t beat you.”</p>
				<p>“Form not good enough yet⁠—quite.”</p>
				<p>He promised her it should be perfect by the time Mark came home.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-8" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>“The pale pearl-purple evening⁠—” The words rushed together. She couldn’t tell whether they were her own or somebody else’s.</p>
				<p>There was the queer shock of recognition that came with your own real things. It wasn’t remembering though it felt like it.</p>
				<p>Shelley⁠—“The pale purple even.” Not pearl-purple. Pearl-purple was what you saw. The sky to the east after sunset above Greffington Edge. Take out “pale,” and “pearl-purple evening” was your own.</p>
				<p>The poem was coming by bits at a time. She could feel the rest throbbing behind it, an unreleased, impatient energy.</p>
				<p>Her mother looked in at the door. “What are you doing it for, Mary?”</p>
				<p>“Oh⁠—for nothing.”</p>
				<p>“Then for pity’s sake come down into the warm room and do it there. You’ll catch cold.”</p>
				<p>She hated the warm room.</p>
				<p>The poem would be made up of many poems. It would last a long time, through the winter and on into the spring. As long as it lasted she would be happy. She would be free from the restlessness and the endless idiotic reverie of desire.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-9" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>“From all blindness of heart; from pride, vainglory and hypocrisy; from envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness,</p>
				<p>“<em>Good Lord, deliver us.</em>”</p>
				<p>Mary was kneeling beside her mother in church.</p>
				<p>“From fornication, and all other deadly sin⁠—”</p>
				<p>Happiness, the happiness that came from writing poems; happiness that other people couldn’t have, that you couldn’t give to them; happiness that was no good to Mamma, no good to anybody but you, secret and selfish; that was your happiness. It was deadly sin.</p>
				<p>She felt an immense, intolerable compassion for everybody who was unhappy. A litany of compassion went on inside her: For old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Kendal, sloughing and rotting in his chair; for Miss Kendal; for all women labouring of child; for old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Heron; for Dorsy Heron; for all prisoners and captives; for Miss Louisa Wright; for all that were desolate and oppressed; for Maggie’s sister, dying of cancer; and for Mamma, kneeling there, praying.</p>
				<p>Sunday after Sunday.</p>
				<p>And she would work in the garden every morning, digging in leaf mould and carrying the big stones for the rockery; she would go to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sutcliffe’s sewing parties; she would sit for hours with Maggie’s sister, trying not to look as if she minded the smell of the cancer. You were no good unless you could do little things like that. You were no good unless you could keep on doing them.</p>
				<p>She tried to keep on.</p>
				<p>Some people kept on all day, all their lives. Still, it was not you so much as the world that was wrong. It wasn’t fair and right that Maggie’s sister should have cancer while you had nothing the matter with you. Or even that Maggie had to cook and scrub while you made poems.</p>
				<p>Not fair and right.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-10" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>“Mamma, what is it? Why are you in the dark?”</p>
				<p>By the firelight she could see her mother sitting with her eyes shut, and her hands folded in her lap.</p>
				<p>“I can’t use my eyes. I think there must be something the matter with them.”</p>
				<p>“Your eyes?⁠ ⁠… Do they hurt?”</p>
				<p>(You might have known⁠—you might have known that something would happen. While you were upstairs, writing, not thinking of her. You might have known.)</p>
				<p>“<em>Something</em> hurts. Just there. When I try to read. I must be going blind.”</p>
				<p>“Are you sure it isn’t your glasses?”</p>
				<p>“How can it be my glasses? They never hurt me before.”</p>
				<p>But the oculist in Durlingham said it <em>was</em> her glasses. She wasn’t going blind. It wasn’t likely that she ever would go blind.</p>
				<p>For a week before the new glasses came Mamma sat, patient and gentle, in her chair, with her eyes shut and her hands folded in her lap. And you read aloud to her: the Bible and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i> in the morning, and Dickens in the afternoon. And in the evening you played draughts and Mamma beat you.</p>
				<p>Mamma said, “I shall be quite sorry when the new glasses come.”</p>
				<p>Mary was sorry too. They had been so happy.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-11" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>April. Mark’s ship had left Port Said nine days ago.</p>
				<p>Mamma had come in with the letter.</p>
				<p>“I’ve got news for you. Guess.”</p>
				<p>“Mark’s coming today.”</p>
				<p>“No.⁠ ⁠… <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jourdain was married yesterday.”</p>
				<p>“Who⁠—to?”</p>
				<p>“Some girl he used to see in Sussex.”</p>
				<p>(That one. She was glad it was the little girl, the poor one. Nice of Maurice to marry her.)</p>
				<p>“Do you mind, Mary?”</p>
				<p>“No, not a bit. I hope they’ll be happy. I want them to be happy.⁠ ⁠… Now, you see⁠—that was why he didn’t want to marry me.”</p>
				<p>Her mother sat down on the bed. There was something she was going to say.</p>
				<p>“Well⁠—thank goodness that’s the last of it.”</p>
				<p>“Does Mark know?”</p>
				<p>“No, he does not. You surely don’t imagine anybody would tell him a thing like that about his sister?”</p>
				<p>“Like what?”</p>
				<p>“Well⁠—he wouldn’t think it very nice of you.”</p>
				<p>“You talk as if I was Aunt Charlotte.⁠ ⁠… Do you think I’m like her?”</p>
				<p>“I never said you were like her.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“You think⁠—you think and won’t say.”</p>
				<p>“Well, if you don’t want to be thought like your Aunt Charlotte you should try and behave a little more like other people. For pity’s sake, do while Mark’s here, or he won’t like it, I can tell you.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t do anything Mark wouldn’t like.”</p>
				<p>“You do very queer things sometimes, though you mayn’t think so.⁠ ⁠… I’m not the only one that notices. If you really want to know, that was what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jourdain was afraid of⁠—the queer things you say and do. You told me yourself you’d have gone to him if he hadn’t come to you.”</p>
				<p>She remembered. Yes, she had said that.</p>
				<p>“Did he know about Aunt Charlotte?”</p>
				<p>“You may be sure he did.”</p>
				<p>Mamma didn’t know. She never would know what it had been like, that night. But there were things you didn’t know, either.</p>
				<p>“What did Aunt Charlotte <em>do</em>?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing. She just fell in love with every man she met. If she’d only seen him for five minutes she was off after him. Ordering her trousseau and dressing herself up. She was no more mad than I am except just on that one point.”</p>
				<p>“Aunt Lavvy said that was why Uncle Victor never married. He was afraid of something⁠—something happening to his children. What do you think he thought would happen?”</p>
				<p>Her mother’s foot tapped on the floor.</p>
				<p>“I’m sure I can’t tell you what he thought. And I don’t know what there was to be afraid of. I wish you wouldn’t throw your stockings all about the room.”</p>
				<p>Mamma picked up the stockings and went away. You could see that she was annoyed. Annoyed with Uncle Victor for having been afraid to marry.</p>
				<p>A dreadful thought came to her. “Does Mamma really think I’m like Aunt Charlotte? I won’t be like her. I won’t.⁠ ⁠… I’m not. There was Jimmy and there was Maurice Jourdain. But I didn’t fall in love with the Proparts or the Manistys, or Norman Waugh, or Harry Craven, or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles. Or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe.⁠ ⁠… She <em>said</em> I was as bad as Aunt Charlotte. Because I said I’d go to Maurice.⁠ ⁠… I meant, just to see him. What did she think I meant?⁠ ⁠… Oh, not <em>that</em>.⁠ ⁠… Would I really have gone? Got into the train and gone? <em>Would</em> I?”</p>
				<p>She would never know.</p>
				<p>“I wish I knew what Uncle Victor was afraid of.”</p>
				<p>Wondering what he had been afraid of, she felt afraid.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
