<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</span>
			</h3>
			<section id="chapter-29-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>Mamma was planting another row of asters in the garden in the place of those that had died last September.</p>
				<p>The outline of the map of South Africa had gone from the wall at the bottom. Roddy’s bit was indistinguishable from the rest.</p>
				<p>And always you knew what would happen. Outside, on the Green, the movements of the village repeated themselves like the play of a clockwork toy. Always the same figures on the same painted stand, marked with the same pattern of slanting roads and three-cornered grass-plots. Halfway through prayers the Morfe bus would break loose from High Row with a clatter, and the brakes would grind on the hill. An hour after teatime it would come back with a mournful tapping and scraping of hoofs.</p>
				<p>She had left off watching for the old red mail-cart to come round the corner at the bottom. Sometimes, at long intervals, there would be a letter for her from Aunt Lavvy or Dan or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sutcliffe. She couldn’t tell when it would come, but she knew on what days the long trolleys would stop by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horn’s yard loaded with powdery sacks of flour, and on what days the brewer’s van would draw up to the King’s Head and the Farmers’ Arms. When she looked out across the Green she caught the hard stare of the Belks’ house, the tall, lean, grey house blotched with iron stains. It stood on the sheer edge where the platform dropped to the turn of the road. Every morning at ten o’clock its little door would open and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belk would come out and watch for his London paper. Every evening at ten minutes past ten the shadow of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belk would move across the yellow blind of the drawing-room window on the right; the light would go out, and presently a blond blur would appear behind the blind of the bedroom window on the left.</p>
				<p>Every morning at twelve <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk would hurry along, waddling and shaking, to leave the paper with her aunt, old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Heron, in the dark cottage that crouched at the top of the Green. Every afternoon at three Dorsy would bring it back again.</p>
				<p>When Mary came in from the village Mamma would look up and say “Well?” as if she expected her to have something interesting to tell. She wished that something would happen so that she might tell Mamma about it. She tried to think of something, something to say that would interest Mamma.</p>
				<p>“I met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> James on the Garthdale Road. Walking like anything.”</p>
				<p>“Did you?” Mamma was not interested in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> James.</p>
				<p>She wondered, “Why can’t I think of things like other people?” She had a sense of defeat, of mournful incapacity.</p>
				<p>One day Catty came bustling in with the tea-things, looking important. She had brought news from the village.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Heron had broken her thigh. She had slipped on the landing. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk was with her and wouldn’t go away.</p>
				<p>Catty tried to look sorry, but you could see she was pleased because she had something to tell you.</p>
				<p>They talked about it all through teatime. They were sorry for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Heron. They wondered what poor Dorsy would do if anything should happen to her. And through all their sorrow there ran a delicate, secret thrill of satisfaction. Something had happened. Something that interested Mamma.</p>
				<p>Two days later Dorsy came in with her tale; her nose was redder, her hare’s eyes were frightened.</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk’s there still,” she said. “She wants to take Aunt to live with her. She wants her to send me away. She says it wouldn’t have happened if I’d looked after her properly. And so it wouldn’t, Mary, if I’d been there. But I’d a bad headache, and I was lying down for a minute when she fell.⁠ ⁠… She won’t go. She’s sitting there in Aunt’s room all the time, talking and tiring her. Trying to poison Aunt’s mind against me. Working on her to send me away.”</p>
				<p>Dorsy’s voice dropped and her face reddened.</p>
				<p>“She thinks I’m after Aunt’s money. She’s always been afraid of her leaving it to me. I’m only her husband’s nephew’s daughter. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk’s her real niece.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“I’d go tomorrow, Mary, but Aunt wants me there. She doesn’t like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk; I think she’s afraid of her. And she can’t get away from her. She just lies there with her poor leg in the splints; there’s the four-pound weight from the kitchen scales tied on to keep it on the stretch. If you could see her eyes turning to me when I come.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“One thing⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk’s afraid for her life of me. That’s why she’s trying to poison Aunt’s mind.”</p>
				<p>When they saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Belk hurrying across the Green to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Heron’s house they knew what she was going for.</p>
				<p>“Poor Dorsy!” they said.</p>
				<p>“Poor Dorsy!”</p>
				<p>They had something to talk to each other about now.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-29-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>Winter and spring passed. The thorn-trees flowered on Greffington Edge: dim white groves, magically still under the grey, glassy air.</p>
				<p>May passed and June. The sleek waves of the hayfields shone with the brushing of the wind, ready for mowing.</p>
				<p>The elder tree by the garden wall was a froth of greenish white on green.</p>
				<p>At the turn of the schoolhouse lane the flowers began: wild geraniums and rose campion, purple and blue and magenta, in a white spray of cow’s parsley: standing high against the stone walls, up and up the green lane.</p>
				<p>Down there, where the two dales spread out at the bottom, a tiny Dutch landscape. Flat pastures. Trees dotted about. A stiff row of trees at the end. No sky behind them. Trees green on green, not green on blue. The great flood of the sky dammed off by the hills.</p>
				<p>She shut her eyes and saw the flat fields of Ilford, and the low line of flying trees; a thin, watery mirage against the hill.</p>
				<p>Since Mark died she had begun to dream about Ilford. She would struggle and break through out of some dream about Morfe and find herself in Ley Street, going to Five Elms. She would get past the corner and see the red brick gable end. Sometimes, when she came up to the gate, the house would turn into Greffington Hall. Sometimes it would stand firm with its three rows of flat windows; she would go up the flagged path and see the sumach tree growing by the pantry window; and when the door was opening she would wake.</p>
				<p>Sometimes the door stood open. She would go in. She would go up the stairs and down the passages, trying to find the schoolroom. She would know that Mark was in the schoolroom. But she could never find it. She never saw Mark. The passages led through empty, grey-lit rooms to the bottom of the kitchen stairs, and she would find a dead baby lying among the boots and shoes in the cat’s cupboard.</p>
				<p>Autumn and winter passed. She was thirty-two.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-29-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>When your mind stopped and stood still it could feel time. Time going fast, going faster and faster. Every year its rhythm swung on a longer curve.</p>
				<p>Your mind stretched to the span of time. There was something exciting about this stretch, like a new sense growing. But in your dreams your mind shrank again; you were a child, a child remembering and returning; haunting old stairs and passages, knocking at shut doors. This child tried to drag you back, it teased you to make rhymes about it. You were not happy till you had made the rhymes.</p>
				<p>There was something in you that went on, that refused to turn back, to look for happiness in memory. Your happiness was <em>now</em>, in the moment that you lived, while you made rhymes; while you looked at the white thorn-trees; while the black-purple cloud passed over Karva.</p>
				<p>Yesterday she had said to Dorsy Heron, “What I can’t stand is seeing the same faces every day.”</p>
				<p>But the hill world had never the same face for five minutes. Its very form changed as the roads turned. The swing of your stride put in play a vast, mysterious scene-shifting that disturbed the sky. Moving through it you stood still in the heart of an immense being that moved. Standing still you were moved, you were drawn nearer and nearer to its enclosing heart.</p>
				<p>She swung off the road beyond the sickle to the last moor-track that led to the other side of Karva. She came back by the southern slope, down the twelve fields, past the four farms.</p>
				<p>The farm of the thorn-tree, the farm of the ash, the farm of the three firs and the farm all alone.</p>
				<p>Four houses. Four tales to be written.</p>
				<p>There was something in you that would go on, whatever happened. Whatever happened it would still be happy. Its happiness was not like the queer, sudden, uncertain ecstasy. She had never known <em>what</em> that was. It came and went; it had gone so long ago that she was sure that whatever it had been it would never come again. She could only remember its happening as you remember the faint ecstasies of dreams. She thought of it as something strange and exciting. Sometimes she wondered whether it had really happened, whether there wasn’t a sort of untruthfulness in supposing it had.</p>
				<p>But that ecstasy and this happiness had one quality in common; they belonged to some part of you that was free. A you that had no hereditary destiny; that had got out of the net, or had never been caught in it.</p>
				<p>You could stand aside and look on at its happiness with horror, it didn’t care. It was utterly indifferent to your praise or blame, and the praise or blame of other people; or to your happiness and theirs. It was open to you to own it as yourself or to detach yourself from it in your horror. It was stronger and saner than you. If you chose to set up that awful conflict in your soul that was your own affair.</p>
				<p>Perhaps not your own. Supposing the conflict in you was the tug of the generations before you, trying to drag you back to them? Supposing the horror was <em>their</em> horror, their fear of defeat?</p>
				<p>She had left off being afraid of what might happen to her. It might never happen. And supposing it did, supposing it had to happen when you were forty-five, you had still thirteen years to write in.</p>
				<p>“It shan’t happen. I won’t let it. I won’t let them beat me.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-29-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>Last year the drawer in the writing-table was full. This year it had overflowed into the top left-hand drawer of the dressing-table. She had to turn out all the handkerchiefs and stockings.</p>
				<p>Her mother met her as she was carrying them to the wardrobe in the spare room. You could see she felt that there was something here that must be enquired into.</p>
				<p>“I should have thought,” she said, “that writing-table drawer was enough.”</p>
				<p>“It isn’t.”</p>
				<p>“Tt‑t⁠—” Mamma nodded her head in a sort of exasperated resignation.</p>
				<p>“Do you mean to say you’re going to <em>keep</em> all that?”</p>
				<p>“All that? You should see what I’ve burnt.”</p>
				<p>“I should like to know what you’re going to do with it!”</p>
				<p>“So should I. That’s just it⁠—I don’t know.”</p>
				<p>That night the monstrous thought came to her in bed: Supposing I published those poems⁠—I always meant to do it some day. Why haven’t I? Because I don’t care? Or because I care too much? Because I’m afraid? Afraid that if somebody reads them the illusion they’ve created would be gone?</p>
				<p>How do I know my writing isn’t like my playing?</p>
				<p>This is different. There’s nothing else. If it’s taken from me I shan’t want to go on living.</p>
				<p>You didn’t want to go on living when Mark died. Yet you went on. As if Mark had never died.⁠ ⁠… And if Mamma died you’d go on⁠—in your illusion.</p>
				<p>If it is an illusion I’d rather know it.</p>
				<p>How <em>can</em> I know? There isn’t anybody here who can tell me. Nobody you could believe if they told you⁠—I can believe <em>myself</em>. I’ve burnt everything I’ve written that was bad.</p>
				<p>You believe yourself today. You believed yesterday. How do you know you’ll believe tomorrow?</p>
				<p>Tomorrow⁠—</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-29-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>Aunt Lavvy had come to stay.</p>
				<p>When she came you had the old feeling of something interesting about to happen. Only you knew now that this was an illusion.</p>
				<p>She talked to you as though, instead of being thirty-three, you were still very small and very young and ignorant of all the things that really mattered. She was vaguer and greyer, more placid than ever, and more content with God.</p>
				<p>Impossible to believe that Papa used to bully her and that Aunt Lavvy had revolted.</p>
				<p>“For thirty-three years, Emilius, thirty-three years”⁠—</p>
				<p>Sunday supper at Five Elms; on the table James Martineau’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Endeavours After the Christian Life</i>.</p>
				<p>She wondered why she hadn’t thought of Aunt Lavvy. Aunt Lavvy knew <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Martineau. As long as you could remember she had always given a strong impression of knowing him quite well.</p>
				<p>But when Mary had made it clear what she wanted her to ask him to do, it turned out that Aunt Lavvy didn’t know <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Martineau at all.</p>
				<p>And you could see she thought you presumptuous.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-29-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>When old Martha brought the message for her to go to tea with Miss Kendal, Mary slunk out through the orchard into the Back Lane. At that moment the prospect of talking two hours with Miss Kendal was unendurable.</p>
				<p>And there was no other prospect. As long as she lived in Morfe there would be nothing⁠—apart from her real, secret life there would be nothing⁠—to look forward to but that. If it was not Miss Kendal it would be Miss Louisa or Dorsy or old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Heron. People talked about dying of boredom who didn’t know that you could really die of it.</p>
				<p>If only you didn’t keep on wanting somebody⁠—somebody who wasn’t there. If, before it killed you, you could kill the desire to know another mind, a luminous, fiery crystal, to see it turn, shining and flashing. To talk to it, to listen to it, to love the human creature it belonged to.</p>
				<p>She envied her youth its capacity for daydreaming, for imagining interminable communions. Brilliant hallucinations of a mental hunger. Better than nothing.⁠ ⁠… If this went on the breaking-point must come. Suddenly you would go smash. Smash. Your mind would die in a delirium of hunger.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-29-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>“It’s a pity we can’t go to his lecture,” said Miss Kendal.</p>
				<p>The train was moving out of Reyburn station. It was awful to think how nearly they had missed it. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles had stayed another minute at the harness-maker’s.</p>
				<p>Miss Kendal sat on the edge of the seat, very upright in her black silk mantle with the accordion-pleated chiffon frills. She had sat like that since the train began to pull, ready to get out the instant it stopped at Durlingham.</p>
				<p>“I feel sure it’s going to be all right,” she said.</p>
				<p>The white marabou feather nodded.</p>
				<p>Her gentle mauve and sallow face was growing old, with soft curdlings and puckerings of the skin; but she still carried her head high, nodding at you with her air of gaiety, of ineffable intrigue.</p>
				<p>“I wouldn’t bring you, Mary, if I didn’t feel sure.”</p>
				<p>If she had not felt sure she wouldn’t have put on the grey kid gloves, the mantle and the bonnet with the white marabou feather. You don’t dress like that to go shopping in Durlingham.</p>
				<p>“You mean,” Mary said, “that we shall see him.”</p>
				<p>Her heart beat calmly, stilled by the sheer incredibility of the adventure.</p>
				<p>“Of course we shall see him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smythe-Caulfield will manage that. It might have been a little difficult if the Professor had been staying anywhere else. But I know <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smythe-Caulfield very well. No doubt she’s arranged for you to have a long talk with him.”</p>
				<p>“Does she know what I want to see him about?”</p>
				<p>“Well⁠—yes⁠—I thought it best, my dear, to tell her just what you told me, so that she might see how important it is.⁠ ⁠… There’s no knowing what may come of it.⁠ ⁠… Did you bring them with you?”</p>
				<p>“No, I didn’t. If he won’t look at them I should feel such an awful fool.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps,” said Miss Kendal, “it is wiser not to assume beforehand. Nothing may come of it. Still, I can’t help feeling something will.⁠ ⁠… When you’re famous, Mary, I shall think of how we went into Durlingham together.”</p>
				<p>“Whatever comes of it I shall think of <em>you</em>.”</p>
				<p>The marabou feather quivered slightly.</p>
				<p>“How long have we known each other?”</p>
				<p>“Seventeen years.”</p>
				<p>“Is it so long?⁠ ⁠… I shall never forget the first day you came with your mother. I can see you now, Mary, sitting beside my poor father with your hand on his chair.⁠ ⁠… And that evening when you played to us, and dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roddy was there.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>She thought: “Why can’t I be kind⁠—always? Kindness matters more than anything. Some day she’ll die and she’ll never have said or thought one unkind thing in all her poor, dreadful little life.⁠ ⁠… Why didn’t I go to tea with her on Wednesday?”</p>
				<p>On Wednesday her mind had revolted against its destiny of hunger. She had hated Morfe. She had felt angry with her mother for making her live in it, for expecting her to be content, for thinking that Dorsy and Miss Louisa and Miss Kendal were enough. She had been angry with Aunt Lavvy for talking about her to Miss Kendal.</p>
				<p>Yet if it weren’t for Miss Kendal she wouldn’t be going into Durlingham to see Professor Lee Ramsden.</p>
				<p>Inconceivable that she should be taken by Miss Kendal to see Professor Lee Ramsden. Yet this inconceivable thing appeared to be happening.</p>
				<p>She tried to remember what she knew about him. He was Professor of English literature at the University of London. He had edited Anthologies and written Introductions. He had written a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of English Literature</i> from Chaucer to Tennyson and a monograph on Shelley.</p>
				<p>She thought of his mind as a luminous, fiery crystal, shining.</p>
				<p>Posters on the platform at Durlingham announced in red letters that Professor Lee Ramsden, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism z3998:name-title">M.A.</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">F.R.S.L.</abbr>, would lecture in the Town Hall at 8 <abbr>p.m.</abbr> She heard Miss Kendal saying, “If it had been at three instead of eight we could have gone.” She had a supreme sense of something about to happen.</p>
				<p>Heavenly the long, steep-curved glass roof of the station, the iron arches and girders, the fanlights. Foreign and beautiful the black canal between the purplish rose-red walls, the white swans swaying on the black water, the red shaft of the clock-tower. It shot up high out of the Marketplace, topped with the fantastically large, round, white eye of its clock.</p>
				<p>She kept on looking up to the clock-tower. At four she would see him.</p>
				<p>They walked about the town. They lunched and shopped. They sat in the Park. They kept on looking at the clock-tower.</p>
				<p>At the bookseller’s in the Marketplace she bought a secondhand copy of Walt Whitman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Leaves of Grass</i>.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>A black-grey drive between bushes of smutty laurel and arbutus. A black-grey house of big cut stones that stuck out. Gables and bow windows with sharp freestone facings that stuck out. You waited in a drawing-room stuffed with fragile mahogany and sea-green plush. Immense sea-green acanthus leaves, shaded in myrtle green, curled out from the walls. A suggestion of pictures heaved up from their places by this vigorous, thrusting growth.</p>
				<p>Curtains, cream-coloured net, sea-green plush, veiled the black-grey walks and smutty lawns of the garden.</p>
				<p>While she contemplated these things the long hand of the white marble tombstone clock moved from the hour to the quarter.</p>
				<p>She was reading the inscription, in black letters, on the golden plinth: “Presented to Thomas Smythe-Caulfield, Esqr., <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.P.</abbr>, by the Council and Teachers of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Schools, Durlingham”⁠—“Presented”⁠—when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smythe-Caulfield came in.</p>
				<p>A foolish, overblown, conceited face. Grey hair arranged with art and science, curl on curl. Three-cornered eyelids, hutches for small, malevolently watching eyes. A sharp, insolent nose. Fish’s mouth peering out above the backward slope of cascading chins.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smythe-Caulfield shook hands at a sidelong arm’s-length, not looking at you, holding Miss Kendal in her sharp pointed stare. They were Kate and Eleanor: Eleanor and Kate.</p>
				<p>“You’re going to the lecture?”</p>
				<p>“If it had been at three instead of eight⁠—”</p>
				<p>“The hour was fixed for the townspeople’s convenience.”</p>
				<p>In five minutes you had gathered that you would not be allowed to see Professor Lee Ramsden; that Professor Lee Ramsden did not desire to see or talk to anybody except <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smythe-Caulfield; that he kept his best things for her; that <em>all sorts of people</em> were trying to get at him, and that he trusted her to protect him from invasion; that you had been admitted in order that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smythe-Caulfield might have the pleasure of telling you these things.</p>
				<p>Mary saw that the moment was atrocious; but it didn’t matter. A curious tranquillity possessed her: she felt something there, close to her, like a person in the room, giving her a sudden security. The moment that was mattering so abominably to her poor, kind friend belonged to a time that was not her time.</p>
				<p>She heard the tinkle of tea cups outside the hall; then a male voice, male footsteps. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smythe-Caulfield made a large encircling movement towards the door. Something interceptive took place there.</p>
				<p>As they went back down the black-grey drive between the laurel and arbutus Miss Kendal carried her head higher than ever.</p>
				<p>“That is the first time in my life, Mary, that I’ve asked a favour.”</p>
				<p>“You did it for me.” (“She hated it, but she did it for me.”)</p>
				<p>“Never mind. We aren’t going to mind, are we? We’ll do without them.⁠ ⁠… That’s right, my dear. Laugh. I’m glad you can. I dare say I shall laugh myself tomorrow.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t <em>want</em> to laugh,” Mary said. She could have cried when she looked at the grey gloves and the frilled mantle, and the sad, insulted face in the bonnet with the white marabou feather. (And that horrible woman hadn’t even given her tea.)</p>
				<p>The enormous eye of the town clock pursued them to the station.</p>
				<p>As they settled into their seats in the Reyburn train Miss Kendal said, “It’s a pity we couldn’t go to the lecture.”</p>
				<p>She leaned back, tired, in her corner. She closed her eyes.</p>
				<p>Mary opened Walt Whitman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Leaves of Grass</i>.</p>
				<p>The beginning had begun.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
