<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>
				<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
			</h3>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>When Christmas came Papa gave her another <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Children’s Prize</i>. This time the cover was blue and the number on it was 1870. Eighteen-seventy was the name of the New Year that was coming after Christmas. It meant that the world had gone on for one thousand eight hundred and seventy years since Jesus was born. Every year she was to have a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Children’s Prize</i> with the name of the New Year on it.</p>
				<p>Eighteen-seventy was a beautiful number. It sounded nice, and there was a seven in it. Seven was a sacred and holy number; so was three, because of the three Persons, the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and because of the seven stars and the seven golden candlesticks. When you said good night to Mamma you kissed her either three times or seven times. If you went past three you had to go on to seven, because something dreadful would happen if you didn’t. Sometimes Mamma stopped you; then you stooped down and finished up on the hem of her dress, quick, before she could see you.</p>
				<p>She was glad that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Children’s Prize</i> had a blue cover, because blue was a sacred and holy colour. It was the colour of the ceiling in <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s Chapel at Ilford, and it was the colour of the Virgin Mary’s dress.</p>
				<p>There were golden stars all over the ceiling of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s Chapel. Roddy and she were sent there after they had had chickenpox and when their whooping-cough was getting better. They were not allowed to go to the church at Barkingside for fear of giving whooping-cough to the children in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Barnardo’s Homes; and they were not allowed to go to Aldborough Hatch Church because of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Propart’s pupils. But they had to go to church somewhere, whooping-cough or no whooping-cough, in order to get to Heaven; so Mark took them to the Chapel of Ease at Ilford, where the Virgin Mary in a blue dress stood on a sort of step over the door. Mamma said you were not to worship her, though you might look at her. She was a graven image. Only Roman Catholics worshipped graven images; they were heretics; that meant that they were shut outside the Church of England, which was God’s Church, and couldn’t get in. And they had only half a Sunday. In Roman Catholic countries Sunday was all over at twelve o’clock, and for the rest of the day the Roman Catholics could do just what they pleased; they danced and went to theatres and played games, as if Sunday was one of their own days and not God’s day.</p>
				<p>She wished she had been born in a Roman Catholic country.</p>
				<p>Every night she took the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Children’s Prize</i> to bed with her to keep her safe. It had Bible Puzzles in it, and among them there was a picture of the Name of God. A shining white light, shaped like Mamma’s vinaigrette, with black marks in the middle. Mamma said the light was the light that shone above the Ark of the Covenant, and the black marks were letters and the word was the real name of God. She said he was sometimes called Jehovah, but that was not his real name. His real name was a secret name which nobody but the High Priest was allowed to say.</p>
				<p>When you lay in the dark and shut your eyes tight and waited, you could see the light, shaped like the vinaigrette, in front of you. It quivered and shone brighter, and you saw in the middle, first, a dark blue colour, and then the black marks that were the real name of God. She was glad she couldn’t read it, for she would have been certain to let it out some day when she wasn’t thinking.</p>
				<p>Perhaps Mamma knew, and was not allowed to say it. Supposing she forgot?</p>
				<p>At church they sang “Praise Him in His name Jah and rejoice before Him.” Jah was God’s pet-name, short for Jehovah. It was a silly name⁠—Jah. Somehow you couldn’t help thinking of God as a silly person; he was always flying into tempers, and he was jealous. He was like Papa. Dank said Papa was jealous of Mark because Mamma was so fond of him. There was a picture of God in the night nursery. He had a big flowing beard, and a very straight nose, like Papa, and he was lying on a sort of sofa that was a cloud. Little Jesus stood underneath him, between the Virgin Mary and Joseph, and the Holy Ghost was descending on him in the form of a dove. His real name was Jesus Christ, but they called him Emmanuel.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
					<p>
						<span>“There is a fountain filled with blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Drawn from Emmanuel’s veins;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sinners plunged beneath that flood</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lose all their guilty stains.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>That was another frightening thing. It would be like the fountain in Aunt Bella’s garden, with blood in it instead of water. The goldfishes would die.</p>
				<p>Mark was pleased when she said that Sarah wouldn’t be allowed to go to Heaven because she would try to catch the Holy Ghost.</p>
				<p>Jesus was not like God. He was good and kind. When he grew up he was always dressed in pink and blue, and he had sad dark eyes and a little, close, tidy beard like Uncle Victor. You could love Jesus.</p>
				<p>Jenny loved him. She was a Wesleyan; and her niece Catty was a Wesleyan. Catty marched round and round the kitchen table with the dishcloth, drying the plates and singing:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
					<p>
						<span>“ ‘I love Jesus, yes, I do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><em>For</em> the Bible tells me <em>to</em>!’ ”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">and</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
					<p>
						<span>“ ‘I am so glad that my Father in Heaven</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tells of His love in the book He has given⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am so glad that Jesus loves me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Jesus loves me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Jesus loves even me!’ ”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>On New Year’s Eve Jenny and Catty went to the Wesleyan Chapel at Ilford to sing the New Year in. Catty talked about the Old Year as if it was horrid and the New Year as if it was nice. She said that at twelve o’clock you ought to open the window wide and let the Old Year go out and the New Year come in. If you didn’t something dreadful would happen.</p>
				<p>Downstairs there was a party. Uncle Victor and Aunt Lavvy and Aunt Charlotte were there, and the big boys from Vinings and the Vicarage at Aldborough Hatch. Mark and Dank and Roddy were sitting up, and Roddy had promised to wake her when the New Year was coming.</p>
				<p>He left the door open so that she could hear the clock strike twelve. She got up and opened the windows ready. There were three in Mamma’s room. She opened them all.</p>
				<p>The air outside was like clear black water and very cold. You couldn’t see the garden wall; the dark fields were close⁠—close against the house. One⁠—Two⁠—Three.</p>
				<p>Seven⁠—When the last stroke sounded the New Year would have come in.</p>
				<p>Ten⁠—Eleven⁠—Twelve.</p>
				<p>The bells rang out; the bells of Ilford, the bells of Barkingside, and far beyond the flats and the cemetery there would be Bow bells, and beyond that the bells of the City of London. They clanged together and she trembled. The sounds closed over her; they left off and began again, not very loud, but tight⁠—tight, crushing her heart, crushing tears out of her eyelids. When the bells stopped there was a faint whirring sound. That was the Old Year, that was eighteen sixty-nine, going out by itself in the dark, going away over the fields.</p>
				<p>Mamma was not pleased when she came to bed and found the door and windows open and Mary awake in the cot.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>At the end of January she was seven years old. Something was bound to happen when you were seven.</p>
				<p>She was moved out of Mamma’s room to sleep by herself on the top floor in the night nursery. And the day nursery was turned into the boys’ schoolroom.</p>
				<p>When you were little and slept in the cot behind the curtain Mamma would sometimes come and read you to sleep with the bits you wanted: “The Lord is my Shepherd,” and “Or ever the silver cord be loosed or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain or the wheel broken at the cistern,” and “the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.”</p>
				<p>When you were frightened she taught you to say, “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.⁠ ⁠… He shall cover thee with His feathers and under His wings shalt thou trust.⁠ ⁠… Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night.” And you were allowed to have a nightlight.</p>
				<p>Now it was all different. You went to bed half an hour later, while Mamma was dressing for dinner, and when she came to tuck you up the bell rang and she had to run downstairs, quick, so as not to keep Papa waiting. You hung on to her neck and untucked yourself, and she always got away before you could kiss her seven times. And there was no nightlight. You had to read the Bible in the morning, and it always had to be the bits Mamma wanted, out of Genesis and the Gospel of <abbr>St.</abbr> John.</p>
				<p>You had to learn about the one God and the three Persons. The one God was the nice, clever, happy God who made Mamma and Mark and Jenny and the sun and Sarah and the kittens. He was the God you really believed in.</p>
				<p>At night when you lay on your back in the dark you thought about being born and about arithmetic and God. The sacred number three went into eighteen sixty-nine and didn’t come out again; so did seven. She liked numbers that fitted like that with no loose ends left over. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sippett said there were things you could do with the loose ends of numbers to make them fit. That was fractions. Supposing there was somewhere in the world a number that simply wouldn’t fit? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sippett said there was no such number. But queer things happened. You were seven years old, yet you had had eight birthdays. There was the day you were born, January the twenty-fourth, eighteen sixty-three, at five o’clock in the morning. When you were born you weren’t any age at all, not a minute old, not a second, not half a second. But there was eighteen sixty-two and there was January the twenty-third and the minute just before you were born. You couldn’t really tell when the twenty-third ended and the twenty-fourth began; because when you counted sixty minutes for the hour and sixty seconds for the minute, there was still the half second and the half of that, and so on forever and ever.</p>
				<p>You couldn’t tell when you were really born. And nobody could tell you what being born was. Perhaps nobody knew. Jenny said being born was just being born. Sarah’s grandchildren were born in the garden under the wall where the jasmine grew. Roddy shouted at the back door, and when you ran to look he stretched out his arms across the doorway and wouldn’t let you through. Roddy was excited and frightened; and Mamma said he had been very good because he stood across the door.</p>
				<p>There was being born and there was dying. If you died this minute there would be the minute after. Then, if you were good, your soul was in Heaven and your body was cold and stiff like Miss Thompson’s mother. And there was Lazarus. “He hath been in the grave four days and by this time he stinketh.” That was dreadfully frightening; but they had to say it to show that Lazarus was really dead. That was how you could tell.</p>
				<p>“ ‘Lord, if thou hadst been here our brother had not died.’ ”</p>
				<p>That was beautiful. When you thought of it you wanted to cry.</p>
				<p>Supposing Mamma died? Supposing Mark died? Or Dank or Roddy? Or even Uncle Victor? Even Papa?</p>
				<p>They couldn’t. Jesus wouldn’t let them.</p>
				<p>When you were frightened in the big dark room you thought about God and Jesus and the Holy Ghost. They didn’t leave you alone a single minute. God and Jesus stood beside the bed, and Jesus kept God in a good temper, and the Holy Ghost flew about the room and perched on the top of the linen cupboard, and bowed and bowed, and said, “Rook‑ke‑heroo‑oo! Rook‑ke‑keroo‑oo!”</p>
				<p>And there was the parroquet.</p>
				<p>Mark had given her the stuffed parroquet on her birthday, and Mamma had given her the Bible and the two grey china vases to make up, with a bird painted on each. A black bird with a red beak and red legs. She had set them up on the chimneypiece under the picture of the Holy Family. She put the Bible in the middle and the parroquet on the top of the Bible and the vases one on each side.</p>
				<p>She worshipped them, because of Mamma and Mark.</p>
				<p>She said to herself: “God won’t like <em>that</em>, but I can’t help it. The kind, clever God won’t mind a bit. He’s much too busy making things. And it’s not as if they were graven images.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>Jenny had taken her for a walk to Ilford and they were going home to the house in Ley Street.</p>
				<p>There were only two walks that Jenny liked to go: down Ley Street to Barkingside where the little shops were; and up Ley Street to Ilford and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall’s, the cobbler’s. She liked Ilford best because of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall. She carried your boots to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall just as they were getting comfortable; she was always ferreting in Sarah’s cupboard for a pair to take to him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall was very tall and lean; he had thick black eyebrows rumpled up the wrong way and a long nose with a red knob at the end of it. A dirty grey beard hung under his chin, and his long, shaved lips curled over in a disagreeable way when he smiled at you.</p>
				<p>When Jenny and Catty went to sing the New Year in at the Wesleyan Chapel he brought them home. Jenny liked him because his wife was dead, and because he was a Wesleyan and Deputy Grand Master of the Independent Order of Good Templars. You had to shake hands with him to say goodbye. He always said the same thing: “Next time you come, little Missy, I’ll show you the Deputy Regalia.” But he never did.</p>
				<p>Today Jenny had made her stand outside in the shop, among the old boots and the sheets of leather, while she and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall went into the back parlour to talk about Jesus. The shop smelt of leather and feet and onions and of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall, so that she was glad when they got out again. She wondered how Jenny could bear to sit in the back parlour with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall.</p>
				<p>Coming home at first she had to keep close by Jenny’s side. Jenny was tired and went slowly; but by taking high prancing and dancing steps she could pretend that they were rushing along; and once they had turned the crook of Ley Street she ran on a little way in front of Jenny. Then, walking very fast and never looking back, she pretended that she had gone out by herself.</p>
				<p>When she had passed the row of elms and the farm, and the small brown brick cottages fenced off with putty-coloured palings, she came to the low ditches and the flat fields on either side and saw on her left the bare, brown brick, pointed end of the tall house. It was called Five Elms.</p>
				<p>Further down the road the green and gold sign of The Green Man and the scarlet and gold sign of the Horns Tavern hung high on white standards set up in the road. Further down still, where Ley Street swerved slightly towards Barkingside, three tall poplars stood in the slant of the swerve.</p>
				<p>A queer white light everywhere, like water thin and clear. Wide fields, flat and still, like water, flooded with the thin, clear light; grey earth, shot delicately with green blades, shimmering. Ley Street, a grey road, whitening suddenly where it crossed open country, a hard causeway thrown over the flood. The high trees, the small, scattered cottages, the two taverns, the one tall house had the look of standing up in water.</p>
				<p>She saw the queer white light for the first time and drew in her breath with a sharp check. She knew that the fields were beautiful.</p>
				<p>She saw Five Elms for the first time: the long line of its old red-tiled roof, its flat brown face; the three rows of narrow windows, four at the bottom, with the front door at the end of the row, five at the top, five in the middle; their red brick eyebrows; their black glassy stare between the drawn-back curtains. She noticed how high and big the house looked on its slender plot of grass behind the brick wall that held up the low white-painted iron railing.</p>
				<p>A tall iron gate between brown brick pillars, topped by stone balls. A flagged path to the front door. Crocuses, yellow, white, white and purple, growing in the border of the grass plot. She saw them for the first time.</p>
				<p>The front door stood open. She went in.</p>
				<p>The drawing-room at the back was full of the queer white light. Things stood out in it, sharp and suddenly strange, like the trees and houses in the light outside: the wine-red satin stripes in the grey damask curtains at the three windows; the rings of wine-red roses on the grey carpet; the tarnished pattern on the grey wallpaper; the furniture shining like dark wine; the fluted emerald green silk in the panel of the piano and the hanging bag of the worktable; the small wine-red flowers on the pale green chintz; the green Chinese bowls in the rosewood cabinet; the blue and red parrot on the chair.</p>
				<p>Her mother sat at the far end of the room. She was sorting beads into trays in a box lined with sandal wood.</p>
				<p>Mary stood at the doorway looking in, swinging her hat in her hand. Suddenly, without any reason, she was so happy that she could hardly bear it.</p>
				<p>Mamma looked up. She said, “What are you doing standing there?”</p>
				<p>She ran to her and hid her face in her lap. She caught Mamma’s hands and kissed them. They smelt of sandal wood. They moved over her hair with slight quick strokes that didn’t stay, that didn’t care.</p>
				<p>Mamma said, “There. That’ll do. That’ll do.”</p>
				<p>She climbed up on a chair and looked out of the window. She could see Mamma’s small beautiful nose bending over the tray of beads, and her bright eyes that slid slantwise to look at her. And under the window she saw the brown twigs of the lilac bush tipped with green.</p>
				<p>Her happiness was sharp and still like the white light.</p>
				<p>Mamma said, “What did you see when you were out with Jenny today?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing.”</p>
				<p>“Nothing? And what are you looking at?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing, Mamma.”</p>
				<p>“Then go upstairs and take your things off. Quick!”</p>
				<p>She went very slowly, holding herself with care, lest she should jar her happiness and spill it.</p>
				<p>One of the windows of her room was open. She stood a little while looking out.</p>
				<p>Beyond the rose-red wall of the garden she saw the flat furrowed field, stripes of grey earth and vivid green. In the middle of the field the five elms in a row, high and slender; four standing close together, one apart. Each held up a small rounded top, fine as a tuft of feathers.</p>
				<p>On her left towards Ilford, a very long row of high elms screened off the bare flats from the village. Where it ended she saw Drake’s Farm; black timbered barns and sallow haystacks beside a clump of trees. Behind the five elms, on the edge of the earth, a flying line of trees set wide apart, small, thin trees, flying away low down under the sky.</p>
				<p>She looked and looked. Her happiness mixed itself up with the queer light and with the flat fields and the tall, bare trees.</p>
				<p>She turned from the window and saw the vases that Mamma had given her standing on the chimneypiece. The black birds with red beaks and red legs looked at her. She threw herself on the bed and pressed her face into the pillow and cried “Mamma! Mamma!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>Passion Week. It gave you an awful feeling of something going to happen.</p>
				<p>In the long narrow dining-room the sunlight through the three windows made a strange and solemn blue colour in the dark curtains. Mamma sat up at the mahogany table, looking sad and serious, with the Prayer Book open before her at the Litany. When you went in you knew that you would have to read about the Crucifixion. Nothing could save you.</p>
				<p>Still you did find out things about God. In the Epistle it said: “ ‘Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel and thy garments like him that treadeth the wine-fat? I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in my anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.’ ”</p>
				<p>The Passion meant that God had flown into another temper and that Jesus was crucified to make him good again. Mark said you mustn’t say that to Mamma; but he owned that it looked like it. Anyhow it was easier to think of it that way than to think that God sent Jesus down to be crucified because you were naughty.</p>
				<p>There were no verses in the Prayerbook Bible, only long grey slabs like tombstones. You kept on looking for the last tombstone. When you came to the one with the big black letters, <b>The King of the Jews</b>, you knew that it would soon be over.</p>
				<p>“ ‘They clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns and put it on his head.⁠ ⁠…’ ” She read obediently: “ ‘And when the sixth hour was come⁠ ⁠… and when the sixth hour was come there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice.⁠ ⁠… And Jesus cried with a loud voice⁠ ⁠… with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.’ ”</p>
				<p>Mamma was saying that the least you could do was to pay attention. But you couldn’t pay attention every time. The first time it was beautiful and terrible; but after many times the beauty went and you were only frightened. When she tried to think about the crown of thorns she thought of the new hat Catty had bought for Easter Sunday and what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall did when he ate the parsnips.</p>
				<p>Through the barred windows of the basement she could hear Catty singing in the pantry:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
					<p>
						<span>“ ‘I am so glad that Jesus loves me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Jesus loves me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Jesus loves me.⁠ ⁠…’ ”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Catty was happy when she sang and danced round and round with the dishcloth. And Jenny and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spall were happy when they talked about Jesus. But Mamma was not happy. She had had to read the Morning Prayer and the Psalms and the Lessons and the Litany to herself every morning; and by Thursday she was tired and cross.</p>
				<p>Passion Week gave you an awful feeling.</p>
				<p>Good Friday would be the worst. It was the real day that Jesus died. There would be the sixth hour and the ninth hour. Perhaps there would be a darkness.</p>
				<p>But when Good Friday came you found a smoking hot-cross bun on everybody’s plate at breakfast, tasting of spice and butter. And you went to Aldborough Hatch for Service. She thought: “If the darkness does come it won’t be so bad to bear at Aldborough Hatch.” She liked the new whitewashed church with the clear windows, where you could stand on the hassock and look out at the green hill framed in the white arch. That was Chigwell.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
					<p>
						<span>“ ‘There is a green hill far a‑a‑way</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Without a city wall⁠—’ ”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The green hill hadn’t got any city wall. Epping Forest and Hainault Forest were there. You could think of them, or you could look at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Propart’s nice clean-shaved face while he read about the Crucifixion and preached about God’s mercy and his justice. He did it all in a soothing, inattentive voice; and when he had finished he went quick into the vestry as if he were glad it was all over. And when you met him at the gate he didn’t look as if Good Friday mattered very much.</p>
				<p>In the afternoon she forgot all about the sixth hour and the ninth hour. Just as she was going to think about them Mark and Dank put her in the dirty clothes-basket and rolled her down the back stairs to make her happy. They shut themselves up in the pantry till she had stopped laughing, and when Catty opened the door the clock struck and Mark said that was the ninth hour.</p>
				<p>It was all over. And nothing had happened. Nothing at all.</p>
				<p>Only, when you thought of what had been done to Jesus, it didn’t seem right, somehow, to have eaten the hot-cross buns.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>Grandmamma and Grandpapa Olivier were buried in the City of London Cemetery. A long time ago, so long that even Mark couldn’t remember it, Uncle Victor had brought Grandmamma in a coffin all the way from Liverpool to London in the train.</p>
				<p>On Saturday afternoon Mamma had to put flowers on the grave for Easter Sunday, because of Uncle Victor and Aunt Lavvy. She took Roddy and Mary with her. They drove in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parish’s wagonette, and called for Aunt Lavvy at Uncle Victor’s tall white house at the bottom of Ilford High Street. Aunt Lavvy was on the steps, waiting for them, holding a big cross of white flowers. You could see Aunt Charlotte’s face at the dining-room window looking out over the top of the brown wire blind. She had her hat on, as if she had expected to be taken too. Her eyes were sharp and angry, and Uncle Victor stood behind her with his hand on her shoulder.</p>
				<p>Aunt Lavvy gave Mary the flower cross and climbed stiffly into the wagonette. Mary felt grown up and important holding the big cross on her knee. The white flowers gave out a thick, sweet smell.</p>
				<p>As they drove away she kept on thinking about Aunt Charlotte, and about Uncle Victor bringing Grandmamma in a coffin in the train. It was very, very brave of him. She was sorry for Aunt Charlotte. Aunt Charlotte had wanted to go to the cemetery and they hadn’t let her go. Perhaps she was still looking over the blind, sharp and angry because they wouldn’t let her go.</p>
				<p>Aunt Lavvy said, “We couldn’t take Charlotte. It excited her too much last time.” As if she knew what you were thinking.</p>
				<p>The wagonette stopped by the railway-crossing at Manor Park, and they got out. Mamma told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parish to drive round to the Leytonstone side and wait for them there at the big gates. They wanted to walk through the cemetery and see what was to be seen.</p>
				<p>Beyond the railway-crossing a muddy lane went along a field of coarse grass under a hedge of thorns and ended at a paling. Roddy whispered excitedly that they were in Wanstead Flats. The hedge shut off the cemetery from the flats; through thin places in the thorn bushes you could see tombstones, very white tombstones against very dark trees. There was a black wooden door in the hedge for you to go in by. The lane and the thorn bushes and the black door reminded Mary of something she had seen before somewhere. Something frightening.</p>
				<p>When they got through the black door there were no tombstones. What showed through the hedge were the tops of high white pillars standing up among trees a long way off. They had come into a dreadful, bare, clay-coloured plain, furrowed into low mounds, as if a plough had gone crisscross over it.</p>
				<p>You saw nothing but mounds. Some of them were made of loose earth; some were patched over with rough sods that gaped in a horrible way. Perhaps if you looked through the cracks you would see down into the grave where the coffin was. The mounds had a fresh, raw look, as if all the people in the City of London had died and been buried hurriedly the night before. And there were no stones with names, only small, flat sticks at one end of each grave to show where the heads were.</p>
				<p>Roddy said, “We’ve got to go all through this to get to the other side.”</p>
				<p>They could see Mamma and Aunt Lavvy a long way on in front picking their way gingerly among the furrows. If only Mark had been there instead of Roddy. Roddy <em>would</em> keep on saying: “The great plague of London. The great plague of London,” to frighten himself. He pointed to a heap of earth and said it was the first plague pit.</p>
				<p>In the middle of the ploughed-up plain she saw people in black walking slowly and crookedly behind a coffin that went staggering on black legs under a black pall. She tried not to look at them.</p>
				<p>When she looked again they had stopped beside a heap that Roddy said was the second plague pit. Men in black crawled out from under the coffin as they put it down. She could see the bulk of it flattened out under the black pall. Against the raw, ochreish ground the figures of two mutes stood up, black and distinct in their high hats tied in the bunched out, streaming weepers. There was something filthy and frightful about the figures of the mutes. And when they dragged the pall from the coffin there was something filthy and frightful about the action.</p>
				<p>“Roddy,” she said, “I’m frightened.”</p>
				<p>Roddy said, “So am I. I say, supposing we went back? By ourselves. Across Wanstead Flats.” He was excited.</p>
				<p>“We mustn’t. That would frighten Mamma.”</p>
				<p>“Well, then, we’ll have to go straight through.”</p>
				<p>They went, slowly, between the rows of mounds, along a narrow path of yellow clay that squeaked as their boots went in and out. Roddy held her hand. They took care not to tread on the graves. Every step brought them nearer to the funeral. They hadn’t pointed it out to each other. They had pretended it wasn’t there. Now it was no use pretending; they could see the coffin.</p>
				<p>“Roddy⁠—I can’t⁠—I can’t go past the funeral.”</p>
				<p>“We’ve got to.”</p>
				<p>He looked at her with solemn eyes, wide open in his beautiful face. He was not really frightened, he was only trying to be because he liked it.</p>
				<p>They went on. The tight feeling under her waist had gone; her body felt loose and light as if it didn’t belong to her; her knees were soft and sank under her. Suddenly she let go Roddy’s hand. She stared at the funeral, paralysed with fright.</p>
				<p>At the end of the path Mamma and Aunt Lavvy stood and beckoned to them. Aunt Lavvy was coming towards them, carrying her white flower cross. They broke into a stumbling, nightmare run.</p>
				<p>The bare clay plain stretched on past the place where Mamma and Aunt Lavvy had turned. The mounds here were big and high. They found Mamma and Aunt Lavvy standing by a very deep and narrow pit. A man was climbing up out of the pit on a ladder. You could see a pool of water shining far down at the bottom.</p>
				<p>Mamma was smiling gently and kindly at the man and asking him why the grave was dug so deep. He said, “Why, because this ’ere lot and that there what you’ve come acrost is the pauper buryin’ ground. We shovel ’em in five at a time this end.”</p>
				<p>Roddy said, “Like they did in the great plague of London.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know about no plague. But there’s five coffins in each of these here graves, piled one atop of the other.”</p>
				<p>Mamma seemed inclined to say more to the gravedigger; but Aunt Lavvy frowned and shook her head at her, and they went on to where a path of coarse grass divided the pauper burying ground from the rest. They were now quite horribly near the funeral. And going down the grass path they saw another that came towards them; the palled coffin swaying on headless shoulders. They turned from it into a furrow between the huddled mounds. The white marble columns gleamed nearer among the black trees.</p>
				<p>They crossed a smooth gravel walk into a crowded town of dead people. Tombstones as far as you could see; upright stones, flat slabs, rounded slabs, slabs like coffins, stone boxes with flat tops, broken columns; pointed pillars. Rows of tall black trees. Here and there a single tree sticking up stiffly among the tombstones. Very little trees that were queer and terrifying. People in black moving about the tombstones. A broad road and a grey chapel with pointed gables. Under a black tree a square plot enclosed by iron railings.</p>
				<p>Grandmamma and Grandpapa Olivier were buried in one half of the plot under a white marble slab. In the other half, on the bare grass, a white marble curb marked out a place for another grave.</p>
				<p>Roddy said, “Who’s buried there?”</p>
				<p>Mamma said, “Nobody. Yet. That’s for⁠—”</p>
				<p>Mary saw Aunt Lavvy frown again and put her finger to her mouth.</p>
				<p>She said, “Who? For who?” An appalling curiosity and fear possessed her. And when Aunt Lavvy took her hand she knew that the empty place was marked out for Mamma and Papa.</p>
				<p>Outside the cemetery gates, in the white road, the black funeral horses tossed their heads and neighed, and the black plumes quivered on the hearses. In the wagonette she sat close beside Aunt Lavvy, with Aunt Lavvy’s shawl over her eyes.</p>
				<p>She wondered how she knew that you were frightened when Mamma didn’t. Mamma couldn’t, because she was brave. She wasn’t afraid of the funeral.</p>
				<p>When Roddy said, “She oughtn’t to have taken us, she ought to have known it would frighten us,” Mark was angry with him. He said, “She thought you’d like it, you little beast. Because of the wagonette.”</p>
				<p>Darling Mamma. She had taken them because she thought they would like it. Because of the wagonette. Because she was brave, like Mark.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>Dead people really did rise. Supposing all the dead people in the City of London Cemetery rose and came out of their graves and went about the city? Supposing they walked out as far as Ilford? Crowds and crowds of them, in white sheets? Supposing they got into the garden?</p>
				<p>“Please, God, keep me from thinking about the Resurrection. Please God, keep me from dreaming about coffins and funerals and ghosts and skeletons and corpses.” She said it last, after the blessings, so that God couldn’t forget. But it was no use.</p>
				<p>If you said texts: “Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night.” “Yea, though I walk through the City of London Cemetery.” It was no use.</p>
				<p>“The trumpet shall sound and the dead shall arise⁠ ⁠… Incorruptible.”</p>
				<p>That was beautiful. Like a bright light shining. But you couldn’t think about it long enough. And the dreams went on just the same: the dream of the ghost in the passage, the dream of the black coffin coming round the turn of the staircase and squeezing you against the banister; the dream of the corpse that came to your bed. She could see the round back and the curled arms under the white sheet.</p>
				<p>The dreams woke her with a sort of burst. Her heart was jumping about and thumping; her face and hair were wet with water that came out of her skin.</p>
				<p>The grey light in the passage was like the ghost-light of the dreams.</p>
				<p>Gas light was a good light; but when you turned it on Jenny came up and put it out again. She said, “Goodness knows when you’ll get to sleep with <em>that</em> light flaring.”</p>
				<p>There was never anybody about at bedtime. Jenny was dishing up the dinner. Harriet was waiting. Catty only ran up for a minute to undo the hooks and brush your hair.</p>
				<p>When Mamma sent her to bed she came creeping back into the dining-room. Everybody was eating dinner. She sickened with fright in the steam and smell of dinner. She leaned her head against Mamma and whimpered, and Mamma said in her soft voice, “Big girls don’t cry because it’s bedtime. Only silly baby girls are afraid of ghosts.”</p>
				<p>Mamma wasn’t afraid.</p>
				<p>When she cried Mark left his dinner and carried her upstairs, past the place where the ghost was, and stayed with her till Catty came.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
